What is WSGI?

WSGI is the Web Server Gateway Interface. It is a specification that describes how a web server communicates with web applications, and how web applications can be chained together to process one request.

WSGI is a Python standard described in detail in PEP 3333.


In Go, goroutines are used to serve many requests at the same time, but not all servers are quite so performant.

Go was built by Google, and one of the purposes of its creation was to power Google's massive web infrastructure. Go's goroutines are a great fit for web servers because they're lighter weight than operating system threads, but still take advantage of multiple cores. Let's compare a Go web server's concurrency model to other popular languages and frameworks.
Node.js / Express.js

In JavaScript land, servers are typically single-threaded. A Node.js server (often using the Express framework) only uses one CPU core at a time. It can still handle many requests at once by using an async event loop. That just means whenever a request has to wait on I/O (like to a database), the server puts it on pause and does something else for a bit.

Node.js Server

This might sound horribly inefficient, but it's not too bad. Node servers do just fine with the I/O workloads associated with most CRUD apps (Where processing is offloaded to the Database). You only start to run into trouble with this model when you need your server to do CPU-intensive work.
Python / Django / Flask

Django and Flask are two of the most popular back-end Python frameworks. They're both built on top of the WSGI standard, which is a specification for how web servers and web applications should communicate.

Generally speaking, Python application code only processes a single request at a time. This means that if a request is being processed, the application won't do anything else until it's finished.

The only reason this isn't completely debilitating is there is a separate WSGI process (for example uwsgi) that handles the concurrency of the application code. It can spawn multiple processes of the Python application to handle different requests at once.

In other words, uwsgi + Flask or uwsgi + Django are both needed to handle the same things that a single Node.js or Go server does alone.
Takeaways

    Go servers are great for performance whether the workload is I/O or CPU-bound
    Node.js and Express work well for I/O-bound tasks, but struggle with CPU-bound tasks
    Python and Django/Flask do just fine with I/O bound tasks, but frankly, no one picks Python for its performance

I'm not saying Go is always "better" than Python or JavaScript when it comes to back-end development, but it generally outperforms them when it comes to speed.

IO bound workflow


Go
They all have their pros and cons

